DOCSP-45110: queries subsections (#80)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/interact-data/query-async.txt

{+odm+}. You can run database queries asynchronously in the background,
which can be beneficial if your application retrieves documents from
multiple collections.

Run Async Queries
-----------------

To schedule an asynchronous query, call the ``load_async`` method on
a ``Criteria`` instance, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: ruby

   @active_bands = Band.where(active: true).load_async
   @public_articles = Article.where(public: true).load_async

The preceding code schedules the queries for asynchronous execution.
You can then access the results of the queries in your view as you
normally do for synchronous queries.

Even if you schedule a query for asynchronous execution, it might be
executed synchronously on the caller's thread. The following list
describes possible scenarios in which this situation might occur:

1. If the scheduled asynchronous task has been executed, the
   results are returned.

#. If the task has been started, but hasn't completed, the caller's
   thread blocks until the task is finished.

#. If the task has not been started yet, it is removed from the
   execution queue, and the query is executed synchronously on the

>    caller's thread.

Reviewer: S: Can you convert some of these from passive to active voice?

.. _mongoid-query-async:

====================
Asynchronous Queries
====================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: ruby framework, odm, memory, background tasks, execution

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to perform asynchronous queries in
{+odm+}. You can run database queries asynchronously in the background,
which can be beneficial if your application retrieves documents from
multiple collections.

Run Async Queries
-----------------

To schedule an asynchronous query, call the ``load_async`` method on
a ``Criteria`` instance, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: ruby

   @active_bands = Band.where(active: true).load_async
   @public_articles = Article.where(public: true).load_async

The preceding code schedules the queries for asynchronous execution.
You can then access the results of the queries in your view as you
normally do for synchronous queries.

> Even if a query is scheduled for asynchronous execution, it might be

Reviewer 2: S: active voice
```suggestion
Even if you schedule a query for asynchronous execution, it might be
```

> executed synchronously on the caller's thread. The following list
> describes possible scenarios that this might occur depending on when the
> query results are being accessed:

Reviewer 2: S:
```suggestion
executed synchronously on the caller's thread. The following list
describes possible scenarios that this might occur:
```

1. If the scheduled asynchronous task has been executed, the
   results are returned.

#. If the task has been started, but hasn't completed, the caller's
   thread blocks until the task is finished.

#. If the task has not been started yet, it is removed from the
   execution queue, and the query is executed synchronously on the

>    caller's thread.

Reviewer 2: Q: is this list exhaustive?

Author: I am not sure - taken from the original text. But the introduction to this list doesn't give the impression that it is exhuastive "possible scenarios"

.. note::

   Even though the ``load_async`` method returns a ``Criteria`` object,
   do not perform any operations on this object other than accessing query results.
   {+odm+} schedules the query for execution immediately after calling
   ``load_async``, so later changes to the ``Criteria`` object might not
   be applied.

Configure Query Performance
---------------------------

Asynchronous queries are disabled by default. When asynchronous queries
are disabled, the ``load_async`` method performs the query immediately
on the current thread, blocking as required. Therefore, calling
``load_async`` on a ``Criteria`` instance in this situation is similar

> to calling the ``to_a`` method to force query execution.

Reviewer 2: Q: I'm not familiar with this method - how is this similar?

Author: `to_a` performs a conversion to an array of documents, i believe that this forces query execution because it requires the query to return documents to convert those documents to an array

Reviewer 3: Correct, if you don't call `to_a` you're not actually sending the command to the server and just returning an instance of `Mongoid::Criteria` instead
